Data itself has value and must be handled appropriately.  In this section, we will explore the basics of classifying and labeling data to ensure it is treated and controlled in a manner consistent with the sensitivity of the data. In addition, we will complete the data life cycle by documenting retention requirements and ensuring data that is no longer in use is destroyed. 

Businesses recognize that information has value and others might steal their advantage if the information is not kept confidential, so they classify it. These classifications dictate rules and restrictions about how that information can be used, stored or shared with others. All of this is done to keep the temporary value and importance of that information from leaking away. Classification of data, which asks the question “Is it secret?” determines the labeling, handling and use of all data. 

Before any labels can be attached to sets of data that indicate its sensitivity or handling requirements, the potential impact or loss to the organization needs to be assessed. This is our first definition: Classification is the process of recognizing the organizational impacts if the information suffers any security compromises related to its characteristics of confidentiality, integrity and availability. Information is then labeled and handled accordingly. 

Classifications are derived from laws, regulations, contract-specified standards or other business expectations. One classification might indicate “minor, may disrupt some processes” while a more extreme one might be “grave, could lead to loss of life or threaten ongoing existence of the organization.” These descriptions should reflect the ways in which the organization has chosen (or been mandated) to characterize and manage risks.  

The immediate benefit of classification is that it can lead to more efficient design and implementation of security processes, if we can treat the protection needs for all similarly classified information with the same controls strategy. 